Can you explain what Hadoop is?
Hadoop is an open-source framework used for distributed storage and processing of large 
datasets. It allows data to be stored across multiple machines and processed in parallel, 
which makes it scalable and fault-tolerant.

Can you explain HDFS in a bit more detail?
HDFS is a distributed file system designed to store very large files reliably. Files are split 
into blocks and distributed across DataNodes, with replication to ensure fault tolerance.

What are the main components of Hadoop?
Hadoop has four main components:
HDFS for storage
YARN for resource management
MapReduce for batch processing
Hadoop Common which provides shared libraries

What is the role of the NameNode?
The NameNode manages metadata — things like file names, directory structure, and block locations.
It doesn’t store the actual data itself, only information about where the data lives.

What happens if a DataNode goes down?
The NameNode detects the failure through missing heartbeats and re-replicates the blocks on 
other DataNodes to maintain the configured replication factor.

Why does HDFS use such large block sizes?
Large block sizes, typically 128 MB, reduce disk seek operations and improve throughput, which 
is ideal for big data workloads that process large files sequentially.

What is YARN used for?
YARN manages cluster resources. It handles job scheduling, resource allocation, and monitoring,
 allowing multiple processing engines to run on the same cluster.

Have you worked with MapReduce directly?
I understand the MapReduce programming model, but in practice I’ve mostly used higher-level 
tools like Hive, which abstract MapReduce logic behind SQL-style queries.

What is Hive and why do we use it?
Hive is a data warehouse layer on top of Hadoop that allows us to query data in HDFS using SQL-like syntax. 
It simplifies big data analytics without needing to write MapReduce code.

Does Hive store the actual data?
No. Hive stores only metadata such as table definitions and schemas. The actual data remains in HDFS.

What is the difference between managed and external tables?
In managed tables, Hive owns the data, so dropping the table deletes the data.
In external tables, Hive only manages the schema — the data stays intact even if the table is 
dropped.

When would you prefer an external table?
When data is shared across teams or tools, or when I want to avoid accidentally deleting the 
data — external tables are safer in those cases.

What is partitioning in Hive?
Partitioning splits data based on column values like date or country. It helps improve 
performance by reducing the amount of data scanned during queries.

How is bucketing different from partitioning?
Partitioning is a logical division based on column values, 
while bucketing is a physical division based on a hash function. 
Bucketing is especially useful for optimizing joins.

Which file formats have you used with Hive?
I’ve worked with Parquet and ORC, which are columnar formats and offer better compression
 and query performance compared to plain text.

Why is Hive not suitable for real-time queries?
Hive is designed for batch processing, so it has higher latency compared to transactional 
databases. It’s great for analytics but not for low-latency OLTP workloads.

How would you improve Hive query performance?
Some common ways are:
Using partitioning
Choosing ORC or Parquet
Avoiding SELECT *
Enabling predicate pushdown
Filtering data as early as possible

Can Hive handle updates and deletes?
Traditionally Hive was append-only. With ACID tables, limited updates and deletes are supported, 
but they come with performance and configuration trade-offs.

Schema on read or schema on write?
Schema on read.

Default replication factor?
3.

Hive or RDBMS for transactions?
RDBMS

Best use case for Hive?
Large-scale analytical queries on big data.

Any final thoughts on Hadoop and Hive?
Hadoop provides scalable storage and processing, while Hive makes big data accessible through
SQL. Together, they’re best suited for batch analytics at scale, especially when performance 
tuning is done using partitions, efficient file formats, and query optimisation.

How does HDFS achieve fault tolerance?
Through block replication and continuous monitoring. The NameNode tracks block locations and 
DataNode health. If a node fails, missing replicas are automatically re-created elsewhere, 
ensuring durability without manual intervention.

What are the limitations of HDFS that engineers should be aware of?
HDFS is optimized for high-throughput sequential reads, not low-latency access or small files.
Small file problems, metadata pressure on the NameNode, and limited random writes are common 
architectural considerations.

How does YARN differ from classic MapReduce?
YARN separates resource management from processing logic, which allows multiple engines—
MapReduce, Spark, Hive, Tez—to coexist on the same cluster instead of being locked into a 
single execution model.

What role does Hive play in a modern data platform?
Hive acts as a SQL abstraction layer over data stored in HDFS or object storage.
It enables analysts and engineers to run large-scale analytical queries without needing to 
write distributed processing code directly.

How does Hive execute a query under the hood?
Hive parses HiveQL into a logical plan, optimizes it, then converts it into a physical 
execution plan using engines like Tez or Spark. Execution is pushed down to the data layer 
wherever possible to minimize I/O.

Managed vs external tables — how do you decide?
I default to external tables in production environments. They provide better data ownership 
boundaries, reduce accidental data loss, and integrate cleanly with multi-tool ecosystems 
like Spark, Presto, and data lakes.

How do you design partitions effectively?
Partitioning should align with query access patterns, not just data attributes. 
I aim for partitions that are:
High selectivity
Evenly distributed
Stable over time
Over-partitioning can be just as harmful as under-partitioning.

When would you use bucketing?
Bucketing is useful when dealing with large joins on high-cardinality columns, especially 
when combined with sorted buckets. That said, its benefits are workload-specific and less
impactful in modern engines compared to partitioning

ORC vs Parquet — how do you choose?
Both are columnar, but:
ORC integrates deeply with Hive and offers strong compression and indexing
Parquet is more engine-agnostic and works well across Spark, Presto, and cloud data lakes
The choice depends on the ecosystem and query engines in use.

Why do Hive queries sometimes perform poorly?
Common causes include:
Poor partition strategy
Excessive data skew
Small file proliferation
Inefficient joins
Overuse of SELECT *
Performance tuning in Hive is primarily about reducing data scanned and shuffled.

How do ACID tables change Hive usage?
ACID tables enable updates and deletes but introduce write amplification and compaction 
overhead. I only enable them when mutation is a genuine business requirement, not by default.

Would you build a new platform today using Hadoop and Hive?
On-prem or regulated environments—yes.
In the cloud, I’d typically favor object storage + Spark/Trino, using Hive mainly as a
metastore, not the primary compute engine.

What signals tell you Hive is the wrong tool?
Sub-second latency requirements
High-frequency updates
Transaction-heavy workloads
Small, rapidly changing datasets
Those use cases belong to OLTP or real-time systems.

How do you explain Hive to non-technical stakeholders?
I describe Hive as a way to run SQL analytics over massive datasets cheaply, trading speed 
for scale and cost efficiency.


Hadoop
1.Mention Hadoop distribution? Difference between CDH and CDP
Hadoop distributions are vendor-packaged versions of Apache Hadoop that bundle ecosystem tools,
management, security, and enterprise support. 
Examples include distributions from Cloudera (CDH/CDP) and others like Hortonworks (legacy).
Difference between CDH and CDP:
CDH is Cloudera’s legacy, on-prem, Hadoop-centric distribution focused on HDFS and YARN for batch 
and SQL analytics.
CDP is Cloudera’s modern, cloud-ready data platform that works on-prem and in public cloud, 
supports hybrid architectures, separates compute from storage, and adds built-in governance,
security, ML, and streaming.

2.Explain Hadoop Architecture
Master- slave architecture.
Hadoop is a distributed framework used to store and process big data. Its architecture consists
of HDFS for distributed storage, YARN for cluster resource management, and MapReduce or Spark 
for parallel processing. Data is stored in HDFS, resources are allocated by YARN, and processing 
happens close to the data, making Hadoop scalable and fault tolerant.

Storage layer -HDFS
Resource Management - YARN
Processing - MapReduce/Spark

3.	Configuration files used during hadoop installation
core-site.xml : defines core hadoop settings and configure hdfs default file system
hdfs-site.xml : Configure HDFS specific settings
Common properties:
    dfs.replication
    dfs.namenode.name.dir
    dfs.datanode.data.dir
mapred-site.xml : Configures MapReduce framework, Job History Server settings
Common properties:
    mapreduce.framework.name (set to yarn)
yarn-site.xml
Configures YARN resource management
Common properties:
    yarn.resourcemanager.hostname
    yarn.nodemanager.aux-services

4.	Difference between Hadoop fs and hdfs dfs
hadoop fs
Generic file system command
Works with any filesystem configured in Hadoop
    HDFS
    Local file system
    S3, ADLS, etc.
Uses the default filesystem set in core-site.xml

hdfs dfs
HDFS-specific command
Works only with HDFS
Directly interacts with HDFS NameNode and DataNodes

5.	Difference between Hadoop 2 and Hadoop 3
Hadoop 2:
Introduced YARN, separating resource management from processing
Uses 3x replication, which consumes more storage
Suitable for traditional big data workloads
Hadoop 3:
Supports multiple standby NameNodes → higher availability
Introduces Erasure Coding → saves ~50% storage
Better containerization and GPU support
Improved performance and scalability

6.	What is replication factor ? why its important
It is the number of replicas of a data block in HDFS
Default value = 3
Set using the property:
dfs.replication in hdfs-site.xml

Fault tolerance
If one DataNode fails, data is still available from another node
Prevents data loss

7.	What if Datanode fails?
In Hadoop, DataNode failure is handled automatically. Each DataNode sends heartbeats to the 
NameNode. If a DataNode stops sending heartbeats, the NameNode marks it as dead. Since HDFS 
stores multiple replicas of each block, the data is still available on other DataNodes. 
The NameNode then triggers re-replication to create new replicas and restore the configured 
replication factor, ensuring no data loss.

8.	What if Namenode fails?
If the NameNode fails and High Availability is enabled, the Standby NameNode automatically 
takes over as the Active NameNode. ZooKeeper manages this failover and ensures only one active 
NameNode at a time. Client requests are redirected, and the cluster continues to run without 
downtime.If High Availability is not enabled, the cluster becomes unavailable because the 
NameNode is a single point of failure.

9.	Why is block size 128 MB ? what if I increase or decrease the block size
HDFS block size is 128 MB because Hadoop is designed for large files and sequential processing.
A larger block size reduces the number of blocks, which lowers the metadata load on the 
NameNode and improves throughput.
If we increase the block size, we reduce metadata and overhead but lose parallelism.
If we decrease the block size, we get more parallelism but increase NameNode memory usage and 
scheduling overhead.

10.	Small file problem
The small file problem in Hadoop happens when there are too many small files in HDFS. 
Each file, even if it is very small, consumes metadata in the NameNode. Since NameNode memory
 is limited, storing millions of small files can overload the NameNode, reduce performance, and
in extreme cases crash the cluster.

11.	What is Rack awareness?
Rack awareness in Hadoop is the ability of HDFS to understand the rack topology of the cluster.
Using this information, HDFS places replicas of data blocks on different racks so that data 
remains available even if an entire rack fails, and read performance is improved by choosing 
the nearest replica.

12.	What is SPOF ? how its resolved ?
SPOF stands for Single Point of Failure. In Hadoop, the NameNode was a SPOF because if it 
failed, the entire HDFS became inaccessible. This issue is resolved using High Availability, 
where an Active NameNode is backed by a Standby NameNode. If the Active fails, the Standby 
automatically takes over using ZooKeeper, ensuring continuous availability.

13.	Explain zookeeper?
ZooKeeper is a distributed coordination service used to manage configuration, synchronization,
and leader election in distributed systems. In Hadoop, ZooKeeper is used for NameNode High
Availability, where it monitors the Active and Standby NameNodes and performs automatic failover, 
ensuring that only one NameNode is active at a time.

14.	Difference between -put and -CopyFromLocal?
-put is a generic command used to copy data into HDFS.
-copyFromLocal clearly indicates copying data from the local file system to HDFS.

15.	What is erasure coding?
Erasure coding is a fault-tolerance mechanism in HDFS where data is split into data blocks and 
parity blocks. Even if some blocks are lost due to node failures, the original data can be 
reconstructed using the remaining blocks. Compared to replication, erasure coding provides 
the same reliability while using significantly less storage.

16.	What is speculative execution?
Speculative execution is a mechanism in Hadoop where slow-running tasks are detected and 
duplicate copies of those tasks are launched on other nodes. The task that finishes first 
is accepted, and the other is killed. This helps reduce overall job completion time caused by 
slow nodes.

17.	Explain Yarn Architecture
YARN stands for Yet Another Resource Negotiator. It is responsible for managing cluster 
resources and scheduling applications in Hadoop. YARN separates resource management from data 
processing and consists of ResourceManager, NodeManager, ApplicationMaster, and Containers.
This makes Hadoop scalable and allows multiple applications to run simultaneously.

18.	How does Applications Manager and Application Master  differ
The Application Manager is a component of the ResourceManager that accepts job submissions and 
starts the ApplicationMaster. The ApplicationMaster is created per application and is 
responsible for negotiating resources, managing tasks, and monitoring execution until the job 
completes.

19.	Explain Mapreduce working?
MapReduce works in two main phases: Map and Reduce.
Input data stored in HDFS is split into blocks and processed by Map tasks in parallel. 
The Map output is shuffled and sorted, then sent to Reduce tasks, which aggregate the results 
and write the final output back to HDFS.

20.	How many mappers are created for 1 GB file?
The number of mappers created is equal to the number of input splits. By default, 
one mapper is created per HDFS block.
Calculation for a 1 GB file
If HDFS block size = 128 MB (default):
1 GB = 1024 MB
1024 ÷ 128 = 8 blocks
👉 8 mappers
If HDFS block size = 64 MB:
1024 ÷ 64 = 16 blocks
👉 16 mappers

21.	How many reducers are created for 1 GB file?
The number of reducers does not depend on the input file size. It is explicitly configured by 
the user or defaults to one reducer if not specified.
default :1 

22.	What is combiner? How does it work and provide performance gain? Where did you use it 
A combiner is an optional local aggregation step in MapReduce. It runs after the map phase on 
the same node and reduces intermediate key–value pairs before they are shuffled to reducers. 
By reducing the amount of data transferred over the network, combiners significantly improve 
job performance.

How a Combiner works (step-by-step)
-----------------------------------
Mapper produces intermediate key–value pairs
Combiner performs local aggregation
Reduced output is sent to shuffle & sort
Reducer performs final aggregation

Performance gain (why it helps)
-------------------------------
Reduces network I/O
Lowers shuffle and sort overhead
Faster job completion

Where did you use it
--------------------
I used a combiner in a Word Count and log aggregation job where the reducer logic was summation.
This reduced shuffle data significantly and improved performance.


23.	What is partitioner? How does it work and provide performance gain? Where did you use it
A partitioner in MapReduce controls how intermediate key–value pairs are distributed to reducers.
By default, Hadoop uses a hash-based partitioner, but we can implement a custom partitioner to 
control data distribution. A good partitioner improves performance by balancing load across
reducers and avoiding data skew.

How a Partitioner works
------------------------
Mapper outputs (key, value) pairs
Partitioner computes a partition number using the key
Each partition maps to one reducer
All records with the same key go to the same reducer

Performance gain (why it matters)
---------------------------------
Ensures even data distribution
Prevents reducer skew (one reducer overloaded)
Improves parallelism and job completion time

When to use a custom partitioner
--------------------------------
Skewed keys (e.g., country, date, user ID)
Business-based grouping
Range-based processing 


Hive – Data warehouse
=====================
1.	Difference between Data warehouse and database?
A database is designed for day-to-day transactional operations like insert, update, and delete,
while a data warehouse is designed for analytical reporting and decision making using large 
volumes of historical data.

2.	Difference between Data warehouse and data mart?
A data warehouse is a centralized repository that stores integrated data from across the 
organization for enterprise-wide analysis, whereas a data mart is a smaller, subject-specific 
subset of the data warehouse designed for a particular department or business function.
EX:
Data Warehouse → Stores all company data (sales, HR, finance, operations)
Data Mart → Stores only sales data for the sales team

3.	Difference between OLTP vs OLAP
OLTP systems handle day-to-day transactional operations like inserts, updates, and deletes, 
while OLAP systems are used for analytical queries, reporting, and decision-making on large 
volumes of historical data.
Ex:
OLTP → ATM withdrawal, online order placement
OLAP → Monthly sales analysis, year-over-year revenue trends

4.	Why hive metadata is stored in SQL?
Hive metadata is stored in an SQL database because metadata is structured, relational, and 
frequently queried. Using an RDBMS provides fast access, transactional consistency, concurrency
control, and reliability, which are critical for managing tables, schemas, partitions, and 
locations efficiently.

5.	Which SQL is the default database for hive?
Apache Derby is used:
Only for development or testing
Supports single-user access
In production, Hive metastore is usually configured with:
MySQL
PostgreSQL
Oracle

6.	What is managed table?
A managed table in Hive is a table where Hive owns the data and metadata. When the table is 
dropped, Hive deletes both the table metadata and the underlying data from HDFS.

7.	What is external table?
An external table in Hive is used when the data already exists outside the Hive warehouse.
Hive only stores the metadata, and when the table is dropped, the data remains intact in HDFS.

8.	When do we use external table?
We use an external table when data already exists outside Hive, when the same data is shared 
across multiple tools, or when we want to prevent accidental data deletion. Dropping an 
external table removes only metadata, not the actual data.

9.	Diff between managed and external table?
In a managed table, Hive manages both metadata and data, so dropping the table deletes the data
from HDFS. In an external table, Hive manages only metadata; the data is stored externally and 
is not deleted when the table is dropped.
Managed → Hive controls data
External → Hive queries data

10.	What happens if you don’t provide location to external table?
If no LOCATION is specified for an external table, Hive creates the table in the default Hive
warehouse directory, but it still treats it as an external table. When the table is dropped, 
Hive deletes only the metadata and not the data.

11.	Performance optimization in hive?
Hive performance can be optimized by reducing the amount of data scanned using partitioning 
and bucketing, using efficient file formats like ORC or Parquet, enabling execution engines 
like Tez or Spark, and tuning joins, memory, and parallelism. 
These techniques reduce disk I/O, network shuffling, and query execution time.

12.	Explain partitioning? Where did you use with example
Partitioning in Hive splits a table into multiple directories based on partition columns like 
date or country. When a query filters on a partition column, Hive reads only the matching partitions 
instead of scanning the entire table, which significantly improves query performance.
I used partitioning on date columns in large fact tables like sales and logs, where most
queries filter data by date ranges. This reduced query execution time significantly.

13.	Explain bucketing? Where did you use with example
Bucketing in Hive splits table data into a fixed number of buckets using a hash function on a 
column. Each bucket is stored as a separate file. Bucketing improves performance for joins, 
aggregations, and sampling because Hive can efficiently match buckets instead of scanning all 
data.

14.	Explain transactional table and implement merge to load incremental data.
A transactional table in Hive supports ACID properties and allows row-level INSERT, UPDATE, 
DELETE, and MERGE operations. These tables use ORC format and maintain delta files to track 
changes. MERGE is commonly used to load incremental data by updating existing records and 
inserting new ones in a single statement.

15.	Explain views vs materialized views
A view is a virtual table that stores only the SQL query and does not store data, whereas a 
materialized view physically stores the query result and is used to improve query performance 
by avoiding repeated computation.

17.	Why is dimensional modelling necessary?
Dimensional modeling is necessary because it organizes data in a way that is easy to understand,
fast to query, and optimized for analytical reporting. It separates business measures into fact
tables and descriptive attributes into dimension tables, making OLAP queries efficient and 
user-friendly.

18.	What is fact and dimension tables?
In dimensional modeling, a fact table stores measurable business data like sales amount or 
quantity, while dimension tables store descriptive information such as date, product, customer,
or region. Fact tables link to dimension tables using foreign keys and together they support 
analytical queries.

19.	What is junk dimension
A junk dimension is a dimension table that combines multiple low-cardinality attributes such as
flags and indicators into a single dimension to avoid cluttering the fact table with many small
columns.

20.	Star Schema
A star schema is a dimensional data model where a central fact table is connected to multiple 
dimension tables in a star-like structure. It is simple, denormalized, and optimized for fast 
analytical queries.

21.	Snowflake schema
A snowflake schema is a dimensional data model where dimension tables are normalized into 
multiple related tables, forming a snowflake-like structure around a central fact table. 
It reduces data redundancy but requires more joins compared to a star schema.

22.	Difference between star and snowflake schema.
The main difference between star and snowflake schema is how dimension tables are designed.
In a star schema, dimension tables are denormalized, which means fewer joins and faster query
performance.
In a snowflake schema, dimension tables are normalized into multiple tables, which reduces data 
redundancy but increases the number of joins and query complexity.

Star schema is preferred for reporting and analytics, while snowflake schema is used when 
storage optimization and complex hierarchies are important.

23.	What is surrogate Key
A surrogate key is an artificial, system-generated unique identifier used in data warehouses, 
especially in dimension tables. It has no business meaning and is used instead of natural or 
business keys to ensure consistency, performance, and easier handling of data changes.

24.	What is CDC
CDC (Change Data Capture) is a technique used to identify and capture changes in a source 
system—such as inserts, updates, and deletes—and propagate only those changes to a target 
system like a data warehouse or data lake, instead of reloading the full data.

25.	What is SCD and its types
SCD - Slowly Changing Dimensions
    SCD Type 0: Retain orginal (no changes allowed once created)
    SCD Type 1: Overwrite (no history kept, correcting errors)
    SCD Type 2: New row is inserted for every change (history is preserved)
    SCD Type 3: Add new attribute (Partial history, Store limited history by adding extra columns)
    SCD Type 4: History table(Changes recorded in separate history table)

26.	Explain SCD type 2 with code example.
SCD Type 2 is used to maintain full history of changes in dimension attributes.
When a dimension record changes, the existing record is expired, and a new record is inserted 
with a new surrogate key. This allows us to track historical changes over time.

27.	When to use CDC/SCD  
CDC is used to capture and move data changes from source systems to targets incrementally.
SCD is used inside the data warehouse to manage how dimension changes are stored, especially 
when history must be preserved.
 
 
------------------- Spark
1.	Advantages of spark over MapReduce
Spark is faster and more flexible than MapReduce because it uses in-memory processing, supports
multiple workloads like batch, streaming, SQL, and machine learning, and uses a DAG-based 
execution engine instead of rigid map and reduce phases. This significantly reduces disk I/O 
and improves performance.

2.	Describe the architecture of Spark
Apache Spark follows a master–worker architecture. The Driver program is the brain of the 
application; it creates the Spark session, builds a DAG of tasks, and schedules work. 
A Cluster Manager allocates resources in the cluster. Executors run on worker nodes, execute 
tasks in parallel, and store data in memory. This architecture enables fast, scalable, and 
fault-tolerant data processing.

3.	Yarn architecture
YARN stands for Yet Another Resource Negotiator and is the resource management layer of Hadoop.
It separates resource management from data processing. YARN consists of a ResourceManager, 
NodeManagers, ApplicationMaster, and containers. The ResourceManager manages cluster-wide 
resources, NodeManagers manage resources on individual nodes, the ApplicationMaster manages a 
specific application, and containers are used to execute tasks. This architecture allows 
multiple processing frameworks like MapReduce and Spark to run on the same cluster.

4.	What is a cluster manager? Which ones have you used?
A cluster manager is responsible for managing cluster resources like CPU and memory and 
allocating them to applications. In Apache Spark, the cluster manager does not execute 
tasks itself but decides where and how many resources should be assigned to executors.

5.	Difference between SparkContext and SparkSession
SparkContext is the original entry point to Spark that manages the connection to the cluster 
and executes RDD-based operations.
SparkSession, introduced in Spark 2.0, is a unified entry point that internally uses 
SparkContext and also provides access to Spark SQL, DataFrames, Datasets, and Hive features. 
Today, SparkSession is the recommended way to start Spark applications.

6.	Describe spark modes to execute the program.
Spark supports three execution modes: Local, Client, and Cluster.
In Local mode, everything runs on a single machine.
In Client mode, the Driver runs on the client machine while executors run on the cluster.
In Cluster mode, the Driver runs inside the cluster, making it more suitable for production 
workloads.

7.	What is dataframe and RDD. When do you use RDD over Dataframe.
An RDD is Spark’s low-level, immutable distributed collection of objects that provides 
fine-grained control over data and execution.
A DataFrame is a higher-level, structured abstraction similar to a table with named columns and
schema. DataFrames are optimized by Spark’s Catalyst optimizer and are generally faster and 
easier to use. 

8.	Transformation vs Action
In Spark, transformations create a new dataset from an existing one and are lazily evaluated, 
meaning they are not executed immediately. Actions trigger the actual execution of the 
transformations and return results or write data to storage.

9.	Narrow transformation vs Wide transformation
Narrow transformations are those where each output partition depends on only one input partition, 
so no data shuffle is required.
Wide transformations are those where output partitions depend on multiple input partitions, 
which causes a shuffle across the cluster. Wide transformations are more expensive than narrow
ones.

10.	What is lazy evaluation 
Lazy evaluation in Spark means that transformations are not executed immediately. 
Spark builds a DAG of operations and waits until an action is triggered. 
This allows Spark to optimize the execution plan and avoid unnecessary computations,
improving performance.
 
 11. Difference between map and flatmap
 map applies a function to each element and returns exactly one output per input, while 
flatMap can return zero, one, or multiple outputs per input by flattening the result. 
flatMap is commonly used when one record needs to be expanded into multiple records,
such as splitting a sentence into words.

12.	What is DAG?
DAG stands for Directed Acyclic Graph. In Spark, it is a graph that represents the sequence 
of transformations applied to data, where nodes are operations and edges represent data flow. 
It is acyclic, meaning it has no loops. Spark uses the DAG to optimize execution, divide jobs 
into stages, and schedule tasks efficiently.

13.	What is lineage?
Lineage in Spark is the dependency graph that tracks how an RDD or DataFrame is derived from 
input data through transformations. If a partition is lost due to failure, Spark uses this 
lineage to recompute only the lost partitions, providing fault tolerance without replication.

14.	Difference between DAG and Lineage?
DAG represents the execution plan of a Spark job and is used for scheduling and optimization, 
while lineage represents the transformation history of an RDD or DataFrame and is used for 
fault tolerance and recovery. DAG helps Spark decide how to execute the job, whereas lineage 
helps Spark recompute lost data.

15.	What happens when you submit a spark job
When a Spark job is submitted, the Driver program starts and creates a SparkSession. 
Spark builds a DAG from the transformations defined in the code. When an action is encountered,
Spark contacts the cluster manager to request resources. Executors are launched on worker nodes
, the DAG is divided into stages and tasks, and tasks are executed in parallel. Finally, results 
are returned to the Driver or written to storage.

16.	Client mode vs cluster mode ? when to use?
In Client mode, the Driver runs on the client machine that submits the job, 
while executors run on the cluster. If the client goes down, the job fails.
In Cluster mode, the Driver runs inside the cluster, so the job continues even if the client 
disconnects. That’s why Cluster mode is preferred for production workloads.

17.	Difference between a DF and a DS 
DataFrame is like a distributed SQL table.
Dataset provides type safety with Spark optimizations.

18.	Difference between a Pandas DF and a Spark DF 
A Pandas DataFrame works on a single machine and processes data in memory, making it suitable 
for small to medium datasets. A Spark DataFrame is a distributed data structure that processes 
data across a cluster, enabling it to handle very large datasets with fault tolerance and parallelism.

19.	Coalesce vs repartition ? when to use ?
coalesce:
--------
Coalesce is an optimized way to reduce partitions.
repartition:
------------
Repartition ensures uniform data distribution.

20.	If Coalesce and repartition can reduce the partitions then which one will you use?
When reducing partitions, I prefer coalesce because it avoids a full shuffle and is faster.
However, if the data is skewed or I need evenly balanced partitions for parallel processing, 
I use repartition, even though it is more expensive.

21.	Scenario  when you need to reduce the partitions?
We reduce partitions in Spark mainly to avoid the small files problem, reduce task overhead, 
and optimize output performance. This is usually done after wide transformations like joins or
aggregations, and just before writing data to storage.

22.	When do you need to increase the partitions?
We increase partitions in Spark when we need more parallelism, better resource utilization, or 
to fix data skew. This is typically done when processing large datasets, after reading small 
numbers of partitions, or before expensive operations like joins and aggregations.

23.	What is a driver?  Example of methods that are executed on driver?
** Driver plans and schedules; executors execute.

The driver is the central coordinator of a Spark application. It creates the SparkContext, 
builds and optimizes the execution plan, communicates with the cluster manager, schedules jobs
and tasks on executors, and collects results. Methods such as collect(), count(), show(), 
broadcast creation, accumulator creation, and query planning are executed on the driver.

24.	What is an executor? Example of methods that are executed on executor?
An executor is a process running on a worker node that executes tasks assigned by the driver. 
Executors perform the actual data processing, cache data in memory, and send results back to 
the driver. Each Spark application has its own set of executors.

25.	When would you use a broadcast join? 
I use a broadcast join when one table is small and the other is large. Spark broadcasts the 
small table to all executors so the join happens locally on each executor, avoiding shuffle 
and significantly improving performance.

26.	What is a broadcast variable? How does it work and gives performance benefit.
A broadcast variable in Spark is a read-only variable cached on each executor, allowing 
efficient sharing of small data across tasks, reducing network I/O, avoiding shuffles, and 
significantly improving performance—especially in joins.

27.	Cache v/s persist
cache() is a shortcut for persisting data in memory only, while persist() allows explicit 
control over storage levels such as memory, disk, or serialization. Persist provides more 
flexibility and reliability, especially for large datasets.

28.	What’s a shuffle?
A shuffle is the process where Spark redistributes data across partitions and executors so that
records with the same key end up in the same partition.

29.	What is Spill? How can we use this to increase performance.
Spill in Spark occurs when in-memory data exceeds available memory, causing Spark to write 
intermediate data to disk. While disk I/O is slower, controlled spilling prevents out-of-memory
errors and job failures. By reducing shuffle size, tuning memory, and using appropriate 
persistence levels, spill can be minimized and overall performance improved.

30.	Mention different ways for Spark performance tuning. Share use case, how you identified the problem, what is the problem, what is the solution.
Spark performance tuning involves minimizing shuffles, optimizing partitioning, caching reused 
datasets, handling data skew, tuning memory and executors, and using efficient file formats. 
Issues are typically identified using Spark UI metrics like shuffle size, spill, task duration,
 and GC time. 
Solutions focus on reducing data movement, improving parallelism, and efficient
resource utilization.

31.	Challenges faced in spark projects you worked on?
In my Spark projects, I faced challenges like data skew, excessive shuffles, memory spills, 
slow joins, repeated recomputation, and inefficient file formats. I identified these issues 
using Spark UI metrics such as task duration, shuffle size, spill metrics, and executor 
utilization. Solutions included broadcast joins, caching, proper partitioning, memory tuning, 
handling skew, and migrating to columnar formats like Parquet, resulting in significant 
performance and stability improvements.

32.	What is OOM error ? what are the possible reasons ?
An OOM error in Spark occurs when the driver or executors run out of memory while processing 
data. Common causes include large shuffles, data skew, excessive caching, large broadcast 
variables, insufficient memory allocation, inefficient serialization, and collecting large 
datasets to the driver. OOM issues are typically identified via Spark UI and logs, and resolved
by reducing shuffle size, improving partitioning, tuning memory, and optimizing caching 
strategies.

33.	Difference between data partition and table partition?
A data partition in Spark is a runtime concept used to divide data for parallel processing, 
while a table partition is a storage-level concept that physically organizes data based on 
column values to reduce data scanning. Data partitions improve parallelism, whereas table 
partitions improve query efficiency through pruning.

34.	If both the dataset are large then how do you optimize the code?
When both sides are large, you can’t rely on broadcast; focus on shuffle efficiency and data reduction:
Filter early, select only required columns (cut data before shuffle).
Ensure join keys are well-distributed; handle skew.
Use bucketing to reduce shuffle across runs.
Avoid UDFs in join/filter paths; use Spark SQL functions.
Use efficient file formats + compression; avoid tiny files; compact outputs.

35.	What is a logical plan vs a physical plan? 
Logical Plan – what needs to be done
Physical Plan – how Spark will do it

36.	What is accumulator?
An accumulator is a shared, write-only variable that Spark executors use to aggregate values 
(like counters or sums) and send the final result back to the driver.

37.	Spark Streaming vs Structured Streaming 
Spark Streaming is the older DStream-based streaming framework that processes data as 
micro-batched RDDs, while Structured Streaming is a higher-level API built on Spark SQL that 
treats streaming data as an unbounded table, offering better optimization, fault tolerance, 
event-time processing, and exactly-once semantics.

38.	What is Dynamic Partition Pruning? 
Dynamic Partition Pruning is a Spark SQL optimization that prunes table partitions at runtime 
using values generated during query execution, typically from the build side of a join. 
It significantly reduces I/O and improves performance for joins on large partitioned tables 
when filter values are not known at query compile time.

39.	Advantages n disadvantages of big data File formats parquet, avro, csv, json.
Parquet is a columnar format optimized for analytical queries with high compression and 
predicate pushdown. Avro is a row-based, schema-driven format ideal for streaming and schema 
evolution. CSV and JSON are text-based and human-readable but inefficient at scale due to 
large size, lack of schema enforcement, and poor performance.

40.	what are compression formats and its specialities
Compression formats reduce storage and I/O by encoding data efficiently. Snappy is preferred 
in Spark for fast analytics, GZIP offers high compression for archival, ZSTD provides a balance
of speed and compression, and formats like LZ4 and LZO are used where low latency or 
splittability is important. Choosing the right compression is a trade-off between CPU cost, 
speed, and storage savings.

41.	Spark optimization techniques. Share use case
Spark optimization involves reducing shuffles, choosing efficient join strategies, 
tuning partitions and memory, handling data skew, caching reused datasets, using columnar 
file formats, and leveraging Spark SQL optimizations like AQE and predicate pushdown. 
Problems are identified using Spark UI metrics such as shuffle size, spill, task duration, and 
executor utilization, and solutions focus on minimizing data movement and maximizing parallelism.

42.	How does Spark memory management works?
Spark uses a unified memory management model where executor heap memory is dynamically shared 
between execution and storage. Execution memory has priority and can evict cached data when 
needed. When memory is insufficient, Spark spills data to disk to avoid failures. Proper tuning
of memory fractions, partitions, caching strategy, and memory overhead is critical to avoid 
spills and OOM errors.

43.	How many stages and task are created.
✅ Stages depend on shuffles
✅ Tasks depend on partitions

In Spark, stages are created based on shuffle boundaries—each wide transformation introduces a 
new stage. Tasks are created based on data partitions, with one task per partition per stage. 
Therefore, the number of stages depends on the number of shuffles, and the number of tasks depends 
on the number of partitions.

44.	How are executors created in spark. What are the methods to identify executor size.
Executors are created by the cluster manager on driver request, and the best executor size is 
foundby balancing cores, memory, and workload behaviour—not by maxing out resources.

Executors in Spark are JVM processes launched by the cluster manager when requested by the 
driver. Executor size is determined by configuring the number of executors, cores, and memory 
per executor, based on cluster resources, workload type, and observed metrics from Spark UI 
such as CPU utilization, memory usage, and GC time. Optimal sizing balances parallelism, memory 
efficiency, and GC overhead.

45.	Explain spark-submit common parameters? 
spark-submit is used to launch Spark applications. Common parameters define where the job runs,
where the driver runs, how much memory and CPU are allocated to driver and executors, and 
additional Spark configurations. These parameters help control performance, scalability, and 
execution mode.

Ex:
spark-submit \
--master yarn \
--deploy-mode cluster \
--name SalesJob \
--num-executors 8 \
--executor-cores 4 \
--executor-memory 8g \
--driver-memory 4g \
--conf spark.sql.adaptive.enabled=true \
sales_job.py



46.	What is data skew? How do you fix it? 
Data skew occurs when data is unevenly distributed across partitions, causing some tasks to 
process much more data than others. This leads to long-running tasks, poor parallelism, and 
overall job slowdown. In Spark, data skew is commonly seen during joins or aggregations.
We fix it using techniques like repartitioning, key salting, broadcast joins, and Adaptive 
Query Execution.

47.	What is key salting? Use case and program
Key salting is used to handle data skew when one or few keys dominate the dataset. 
We add a random or deterministic prefix (salt) to the key so that records with the same 
original key are distributed across multiple partitions. After processing, the salt is removed
and results are aggregated back to the original key.

48.	What is Adaptive Query Execution? 
Adaptive Query Execution is a Spark feature that dynamically optimizes queries during runtime 
using real data statistics. It can change join strategies, handle data skew, and adjust shuffle
partitions to improve performance without manual tuning.


49.	For 1 GB file how many partitions will be created. ? support your answer with practical 
For a 1 GB file, Spark creates partitions based on the HDFS block size.
With the default 128 MB block size, Spark creates 8 partitions.

50.	For any given program, how many jobs , stages and task are created.
In Spark, each action creates one job.
Stages are created based on shuffle boundaries—each shuffle splits the job into multiple stages.
Tasks are created per stage, and the number of tasks equals the number of partitions in that stage.

51.	Role of checkpointing in spark and spark streaming.
Checkpointing in Spark is used to persist data or state to reliable storage to break long 
lineage chains and enable faster recovery from failures. In Spark Streaming, checkpointing is
mandatory for stateful operations because it stores streaming metadata and state so the 
application can resume correctly after a crash.